# Introdution to C programming language
C is a general-purpose(can be used to build almost any domain specific program) procedural(executed top to bottom) programming language.

It was developed by Dennis Ritchie at AT&T's Bell labs in 1972.

C is mostly used for development of Operating systems, Kernels, Compilers etc.

Most of modern programming languages are directly or indirectly influenced from C.


# History of C programming
C shares root deep in the development of UNIX operating system.

In late 1960s Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie developed B, the inherited many of its features from BCPL (Basic Combined Programming Language).

Early 1970s need for a portable operating system and programming laguage arose, thus resulting starting in development of C.

Dennis Ritchie developed C during 1969 to 1972. C inherited many features from ALGOL, BCPL and B.

In 1978, C gained huge popularity from the Bell laboratories to the heart of every programmer. Brian Kernighan along with Dennis Rithie published the first book on C "The C Programming Language".


# C Standards
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) sets the standards for C.

The first C standard is known by C89 and the current C standard is commonly refered as C11


# Features of C
- Simple and Robust:
    - Has lesser number of programming constructs

- Portability:
    - Machine independent all that is needed is a C compiler for a specific machine.

- Modularity:
    - Is divisible in several smaller programs that can later be combined to build the final program.

- Extensibility:
    - Provides a rich-set of built in libraries, and also allows one to write their onwn.

- Speed:
    - Compilation and execution is done on binary files, hence faster that some other programming laguages(interpreted languages)

# Why Learn to program in C
    * C is much simpler than other programming laguages, best for beginners
    * C helps understand functions of computer underneath the hood
    * Has rich support for low-level programming
    * It is the backbone of modern operating systems
    * C is used in development of Compilers, Assemblers, Language Interpreters, Device Drivers, Database systems, Servers, Game frameworks.
    * Helps understand other languages as they are closely related to C

