# Section 5

# Odds and Ends

## main()
- Execution of C program begins at main. 
- A single executable must contain one main.
- It returns an int, 0 on successfull completion and non-zero if there's an error.

## Multiple Files
What features C depends on:

### Prototypes.
What:
    - Notifies caller of existence of function, has name and arguments but not body
E.g:
    ```
    int twice(int num);
    void swap(int *a, int *b);
    ```
ANSI C, states:
    1. `static` function : don't need prototype as long as they're defined before or above where they are called.
    2. non-static function : Need's prototype, where:
        - Prototype before definition
        - Client code, must see prototype, code another file.

### Preprocessor
What:
    - Step before compiling.
Directives:
    ```
    #define
    #include
    ```

### 1. #define
What:
    - Sets up symbolic replacements in the source, does it without understanding
    ```
    #define MAX 100
    #define SEVEN_WORDS that_symbol_expands_to_all_these_words
    ```
    Later code can use the symbols which will be replaced by the text to the right of each symbol in its #define.

### 2. #include 
What do:
    - Brings text from **different files** during compilation.
    - It pastes in the text from the given file and continues compiling. Does not do error checking.
    - Its used in the .h/.c file.
    ```
    #include "foo.h"    // refers to a "user" foo.h file -- in the origining directory for the compiler
    #include <foo.h>    // refers to a "system" foo.h file -- in the compiler's directory somewhere
    ```
### foo.h vs foo.c
C conventions for "foo.c" with functions,
    - "foo.h" will contain prototypes for functions in "foo.c" which clients may want to call.Functions in "foo.c" which are for "internal use only" and should never be called by clients should be declared `static`.
    - Have line to show definitions in foo.c near the top to show "prototype before definition".
    ```
    #include "foo.h"    // show the contents of "foo.h" to the compiler at this point.
    ```
    - for xxx.c file that wishes to call a function defined in "foo.c", include this line to ensure "clients must see prototypes" rule.
    ```
    #include "foo.h"
    ```
### #if
What: Test
    - looks at symbols defined in #defines and turn on and off which lines the compiler uses.
E.g
    - The following example depends on the value of the FOO #define symbol. If its true, then the "aaa" lines (whatever they are) are compiled and the "bbb" lines are ignored. If FOO were 0, then the reverse would be true.
    ```
    #define FOO 1
    ...
    #if FOO
        aaa
        aaa
    #else
        bbb
        bbb
    #endif
    ```
Also:
    #if 0 ...#endif effectively comments out areas of code you don't want to compile, which keep in source file.

## Multipe #includes -- #pragma once
Error:
    - Have include .h file is #included into a file more than one time.
    - Avoid #including .h files in other .h files if at all possible.
What #prama once:
    - Prevents a single file from being #included more than once in any one file.
    - Solves multiple #include problems.
    ```
    // foo.h
    // The following line prevents problems in files which #include "foo.h"
    #pragma once

    <rest of foo.h...>
    ```
### Assert
What: Function.
    - Do: Checks memory bounds.
    ```
    #include <assert.h>
    #define MAX_INTS 100
    {
        int ints[MAX_INTS];
        i = foo(<something complicated>);       // i should be in bounds, but is it really

        assert (i >= 0);         // safety assertions
        assert (i < MAX_INTS);  

        ints[i] = 0;
    }
    ```
assert() expressions will either be left in code for testing or ignored.

Only put expressions in assert() tests with do not need to be evaluated for the proper functioning of the program
```
    int errCode = foo();       // yes
    assert (errCode == 0);

    assert (foo() == 0);       // NO, foo() will not be called if the compiler removes the assert()
```

