# Basic Types and Operators

## Integer Types
- Integral types:
    * The all behave like integers and can be mixed together and used in similar ways. 

    * The differences are due to the different number of bits ("widths") used to implement each type -- the wider types can store a greater ranges of values.

* They include:
    1. `char` ASCII character -- at least 8 bits(byte). It's enough to store a single ASCII character.
    2. `short` Small integer -- at least 16 bits which provides a signed range of -32768..32767.
    3. `int` Default integer -- at least 16 bits. "most comfortable" size for the computer.
    4. `long` Large integer -- at least 32 bits. 

- Can be preceded by the qualifier `unsigned` which disallows representing negative numbers, but doubles the largest positive number representable.

### Extra: Portablility Problems
- If design function that's run on different machines, use typedefs to set up types like `Int32` for 32 bit int and `Int 16` for 16 bit int.

## char Constants
- It's written with single qoutes(') like 'A' or 'z'.

- The `char` constant `A` is really just a synonym for the ordinary integer value 65 which is the ASCII value for uppercase 'A'.

- There are special case char constants, such as '\t' for tab, for characters which are not convenient to type on a keyboard.
    - 'A'       uppercase 'A' character
    - '\n'      newline character
    - '\t'      tab character
    - '\0'      the "null" character -- integer value 0
    - '\012'    the character with value 12 in octal, which is decimal 10.

## int Constants
- Ways to write number, 234 default `int`:
    - 42L : Long
    - 0x  : hexadecimal
    - 01  : Octal - Precede with "0" -- 012, represent 10

## Type Combination and Promition
- Integral types may be mixed together in arithmetic expressions since they are all basically just integers with variation in their width.
    E.g
    `char` and `int` can be combined in arithmetic expressions such as ('b' + 5)

- How compiler deals with different widths present:
    - Compiler "promotes" the smaller type (char) to be the same size as the larger type (int) before combining the values.
    - Promotions don't lose information - they always convert from a type to compatible,larger type to avoid losing information.

###  Pitfall -- int Overflow
What:
    - When a value exceeds the size of a data type. the high order bits just vanish.

## Floating point Types.
What:
    - Values with decimal places

Precision(decimal places):
    - `float`   Single precision float(6 decimal places)        size: 32 bits
    - `double`  Double precision float(15 dp)        size: 64 bits
    - `long double` Bigger.

Constants in source code ie `3.14` default to type `double` unless suffixed with an `f`(float) or `l`(long double).

For comparison:
    - Don't use equality (==) instead inequality (<).

### Comments
Type:
    - Multiline     : `/* .. comments ..*/`
    - Single-line   : `//`

Do:
    * Describe what the code **accomplishes**

## Variables
What:
    * Declaration that reserves and names an area in memory at run time to hold a value of particular type.

E.g
    ```c
    int num;
    num = 42;
    ```
Variable names start with random values, thus properly intialize them.

Naming:
    - Case sensitive
    - Can contain digits and underscore`(_)`, but not start with digit.
    - Can declare mulitple variables after type on same line, separate with comma.
E.g
```
float x, y, z, X;
```

### Assignment Operator =
What:
    * single equals sign (=).
    ```
    i = 6;
    i = i + 1;
    ```
Do:
    * Copies value on left hand side to right hand side.

## Truncation
What:
    * Move value from larger to smaller

For float:
    * Fractional part is dropped

### Pitfall - int vs. float Arithmetic
Division:
    - Integer = integer
    - Float = float

## NO Boolean -- Use int
No distinct boolean type, what:
    * Int: 0(false), 1(true)
```
i = 0;
while (i - 10)
{
    ;
}
```
    * The statement will execute until the variable i takes on the value 10, at which it becomes false.

## Mathematical Operators
* Use parenthesis to avoid issues due to a misunderstanding of precedence.
* Sensitive to type of operands:
    * Division (/)
        1. Integer = int answer
        2. Float = float answer

* Include:
    +   Addition
    -   Subtraction
    /   Division
    *   Multiplication
    %   Remainder (mod)

### Unary Increment Operators: ++--
* Operates on one value:
    - Include `++` and `--` That increment or decrement the value in a variable.

* Types:
    "pre" and "post" variants.
    ```
    var++      increment   "post" variant
    ++var      increment    "pre" variant
    
    var--      decrement    "post" variant
    --var      decrement    "pre" variant

    int i = 42;
    i++;            // increment on i
    // i is now 43
    i--;            // decrement on i
    // i is now 42
    ```

## Relational Operators
* Also comparison operators:
    
* Include:
    ==      Equal
    !=      Not Equal
    >       Greater Than
    <       Less Than
    >=      Greater or Equal
    <=      Less or Equal

## Pitfall = not ==
* Dont confuse
    Assignment  =
    Equality    ==

### Logical Operators
* Note: Value 0 is false, anything else is true.

* They evaluate left to right.

* Include:
    !       Boolean not (unary)
    &&      Boolean and
    ||      Boolean or

## Bitwise Operators.
* Manipulate memory at the bit level.

* Use:
    - Writing low level hardware or operating system code where ordinary data types ... are insufficient.
    - Used with unsigned types.
    - Shift operations are guaranteed to shift 0 bits into the newly vacated positions when used on unsigned values.

* Include:
    ~       Bitwise Negation (unary) - flip 0 to 1 and 1 to 0 throughout
    &       Bitwise And
    |       Bitwise Or
    ^       Bitwise Exclusive Or
    >>      Right Shift by right hand side (RHS) (divide by power of 2)
    <<      Left Shift by RHS (multiply by power of 2)

## Other Assignment Operators
* Show variations on basic:
```
+=      Adds the right hand side to the left hand side
x = x + 10;
x += 10;
```
* Usefull for long expressions.

* Include:
    +=, -=      Increment or decrement by RHS
    `*=, /=`    Multiply or divide by RHS
    `%=         Mod by RHS
    `>>=`       Bitwise right shift by RHS (divide by power of 2)
    `<<=`       Bitwise
